Fantastic. Okay, well first things is details so can you please tell us your name and where
and when you were born?
My name is Fisela Ali and I was born in South America, Guyana. It's on the North Atlantic.
It's by the Amazon rainforest.
Do you remember that area that you grew up on?
Yes, I do. Yes, because I have many lakes and the Atlantic Ocean and I was overlooking
the Atlantic Ocean. It's interesting. It's on the Essequible Coast of Guyana.
What was it like growing up there?
Oh, it was lovely. It was very homely. The people are very laid back and happy. You know,
they had a good nature.
What was it like growing up in the house? What was the household like?
The house was, I had eight sisters so it was interesting. My mom and dad.
What was your favorite memory of your childhood? Is there one particular or is there multiple?
I think because I was the eldest, everyone like played a part and I used to enjoy that.
Everyone used to make fuss out, you know. It was a happy occasion. I used to feel happy, everyone together.
What do you think about the difference between the childhood there and here as well?
I think the childhood there is much better. It's more open and you can see people come to you.
You don't go to the people. I think it's more friendly.
Is there one event or celebration that stands out to you?
I used to take part in different celebrations. Not a special one.
I think it's like whatever celebration is around, we used to take part in that.
Like what? I'm not sure.
Different cultural celebrations. Whatever is around. We used to take part in it.
As a child or a young person, was there anything that was really exciting about the celebration?
I used to like sports. Like going to look at sports. Cricket, football, that sort of thing.
Other celebrations like the Muslim celebration, Hindus, the Christians.
The schools over there, when you go to the school, they take you to all these places like to the churches and the temple and the mosque.
So yes, we used to take part in things which is good. It's different over there from over here. I know it is.
Speaking over here, what made you decide to come to the UK?
I came for a marriage purpose.
Did you have any expectations of the UK?
No. I came as a teenager so it was difficult for me to understand what it's like.
I came when I was young.
How old were you?
About eighteen. I came on my own so it was different.
What I noticed over here is that it's like a colder country and people are more reserved.
So it's difficult to... even communication I find it a bit difficult.
Back home in South America it was much easier to get on with people.
And it makes sense with what you just said about people coming to you as well?
Yes, the door is open and people come to you. It's different. I don't know about now but when I was growing up.
It was like that. I think things are changing everywhere because of the technology.
It's a digital world, isn't it?
What was the most important thing you think you had to leave behind?
I love my family and I miss that quite a lot.
Because when I came here it was more like isolation and the weather wasn't great and I had to get used to people.
So I think I was a bit more isolated when I came here.
But now I'm getting a bit more open to get out and to meet people.
How did you travel to the UK?
I came by air.
What was the best or the worst thing about that journey?
Oh, it was hard. I was crying all the way.
So it wasn't that easy for me.
I think in my country I used to feel myself more. I had that nice feeling.
When I came here it was like a cold feeling. I don't know if it's the weather. It could be.
And a bit of isolation. It's different.
I don't know. It could be the weather because in South America it's more tropical.
And over here the weather, you have seasons, it changes quite a lot.
It could be that. I'm not sure.
Is isolation and the coldness and refractions?
When you're home there's a lot of people you can see and you can see a reflection.
My parents had a big general store so I used to work in it since I was five.
So I think that helped me to be among people. It was nice.
I never felt sad or unhappy because people are around you all the time. So that was good.
Does that mean all of you and your sisters as well?
Yes, sisters and brothers. I have brothers as well. Three brothers.
When did you come to the UK and where did you land as well?
I came in the 70s. I landed in Heathrow. So I lived in London for a while. About three or four years.
How did that feel? How did you feel arriving to the UK?
It was very dismal, dark. It wasn't attractive at that moment to me.
Remember South America is more like the sunshine, the brightness, the people.
Over here people are more indoor. You have to go out to certain things to be able to see people.
When did you arrive in Newport then?
I lived in London for three or four years. Then went to the Midlands to live in Leicester.
From Leicester I came to Wales. So that is a long time. 1968.
Wales is much better. I think because it is smaller. You can get on a bit more with the people. But in London it was different.
It is fast.
So what was the decision to move to Leicester?
I think it is to do with my husband. He was moving to different places. So I had to follow him in that way.
Coming and arriving to Newport, what can you remember about the first weeks or months that you were here?
I did like it. I did like Newport. I think because it is smaller and the people are a bit more friendly.
Then I had a job in the hospital. So that helped quite a lot. Seeing people all the time. So it helped me. That was good.
By seeing people you are interacting with people.
Yes, interacting. It takes away things from your mind. It takes away all the negative feelings.
Did that help them to not so much think about home?
Yes, that is right. It helped me. So that I don't have to think about where I came from.
Wherever I settled I tried to make it my home. So that was good in that way.
Then I had my three daughters growing up. So that was keeping me busy also.
How many were born here in Newport?
Two were born in Leicester and one in London.
As you were travelling and when you were in Newport, did you have any friends or family that joined you from Guyana?
No, I didn't know anyone from Guyana. Just me. But I had other friends and neighbours. I just make friends with whoever is around me.
You said about waking up late and then you were a nurse. You went into the hospital.
I was assisting the doctors and midwives. So it was like chaperoning and assisting.
That was very nice. I enjoyed that. I'm interacting with people of different levels. So that was good.
I did enjoy it. It helps me a lot so I don't forget back home where I came from.
I felt like a community. I felt nice as I'm in a community. So that was very good.
Even to not forget back home, what could you say that you miss the most about?
I miss the family atmosphere. It's closer. It's a different feeling. I can't express it. It's a nicer feeling. I miss that close connection.
I think it's a different upbringing back home from here. I notice.
Definitely there's that big difference.
It's a big gap really. Over here I can't feel that. Even with my children I notice they're different from me.
I know they have their own personalities but I can see it. They can't imagine where I came from and how things are over there.
They were born in these countries. They're adapting to these countries, which is good.
What would you say, of course there's the family aspect, what could you say that you love the most about your culture?
I like the culture because it brings you together as a strong family unit. That nurturing is important. I did miss that with all my siblings.
I like the community spirit. It's nice.
Is there elements of your culture that you've made an effort to preserve?
I think over here it's very different. I tried my best because I don't go out a lot. I think Aged Alive helped me to get out a bit, to socialize.
That was good because then I can see different people from different parts of the world, different nationalities.
In that way it's good because then I can interact a bit more.
I've got a little grandson and he's keeping me busy at the moment. I have to lay apart with him at the moment.
I'm trying to know myself. It took me a long time. As I'm getting on, it's only now I'm getting to know myself.
Is there certain foods, music that's helped you?
I like all sorts of different cultural music. I like different types of food. I don't have a speciality.
I like rice. I like a lot of Asian food as well as my own country food. I like different types. I like different tastes.
What is the Guyanese food?
This is a cooker price, kechari, salt fish. They like salt fish. They like pepper pot.
There's a lot of plantain and cassava dumplings. They eat a lot of pepper.
They grow it there. It's a lovely country. I miss it for all the different fruits.
The tropical fruits are different from over here.
When was your last return?
Since I came, I never returned. That's why it's sad. That's about four to seven years.
Is there a particular reason or is it just not yet?
I think because of the kids. I had the children just after I got married.
It prevented me from going. I was on my own, in isolation as usual. I had to look after them. It wasn't that easy.
It was hard for me to make friends at that time of my life.
As you spoke about friends and being out there, that age alive you said you spoke about.
I think now because I stopped working, I never used to socialise much when the kids were younger.
Because I was working in the hospital, I was tied up with that. Just going to work and back home.
That sort of routine thing. It's only now I have the time to do a bit more.
To go on outings and to get together. I don't do a lot but I try to whenever I can spare time.
How did you become involved with Age Alive?
I think it was just after the lockdown I got to find out about Age Alive. Someone told me about it and decided to join.
What can you tell us about your involvement with Age Alive?
I'm not totally involved in anything at the moment. I participate in events they have.
I like to listen a lot. Whatever programme they're having, I try to take part whenever I can.
Is there one event or a trip?
I did go on the trips. They had a few other things I used to participate in.
How do you think that Age Alive supports the ethnic groups over 50?
I think they're doing well. They're making progress. A lot of them are in the same type of situation.
I think it's helping them to get together and to do things together. It helped me as well to get to know people.
If you're in your home you can't get to know people. So this sort of environment is good to meet people.
You said to learn about different parts of the world as well?
Yeah, that's right. I need to know that. I need to learn about different places in the world.
I think that is important to hear about different stories, about different parts.
I don't go to those parts of the world.
Why is that also important for our young people, our next generation, to know and hear the stories about different parts?
I think it's very important. I don't think young people are so keen to know things like that.
If they can get some feedback to know about different parts of the world, it would be good.
Because my children, they don't really want to know. They're too busy and occupied with their own things.
Even though they're still very, very young and they haven't got anything.
I suppose when they get older they would want to listen a bit more. But at the moment they're distracted.
This is a question that has come to mind now. If there was anything you could say to a younger version of yourself?
Of myself?
When I was young I was very sensitive and timid. I never used to speak a lot.
I don't know if I was afraid of things. Although I was happy, I had that sort of sensitivity in me.
I don't know. I can't explain more about it. Although I used to enjoy myself.
But I was very sensitive and I get emotional as well. I don't know the reason behind that.
Because it's my grandson. He's got a bit of that in him. I don't know what it is.
What message can you give him or yourself?
Hopefully he will grow out of that. I hope so. Because the education system is different here.
When you go to school they were very strict. You used to get smacked to be late.
If you don't do things right you get a bit of punishment for that. So it could be that is why. I'm not sure.
Have you kept any family heirlooms or photographs or ornaments?
I have. Some nice ones.
Photographs? Why are they important to you?
It's important because I was born there. I have to remember that for my whole life. That's important.
Beautiful. That's everything I have. All the questions here.
I don't know if there's anything else you would like to share at all.
I'm happy to be here to share certain things. I hope it's...
What should I say?
I hope it would be okay whatever you are recording. But don't put that in my record.
Thank you.
Can you play it back for me to see? Because you had cut out some of it.
Yes, in the text. I'll cut this now.